# Raising Nationwide SAT Participation Rates

### Problem Statement
The CollegeBoard is the organization that administers the SAT in order to make it easier for educational institutions to judge the academic proficiencies of their applicants and more importantly expand access to higher education opportunities through college planning services, career assistance, and other services. While they are a not-for-profit organization, higher funds would enable them to provide better services that help students all over the country find the best path through their academic journey to meet their eventual career goals. The CollegeBoard gains their revenue from registration fees paid by students who want to take the test for college applications. While being a prominent test that many colleges accept, the SAT competes with the ACT across the country for the preferred diagnostic test of academic proficiency for pre college education. This report will recommend what the best strategy would be to increase SAT participation rates and which states to implement the strategy in order to compete with other standardized test providers in the country and provide a better suite of education services to students nationwide. 

### Executive Summary
My approach was to first identify which states had a high participation rate for either SAT and the ACT. This was done by combining the SAT and ACT data from 2017 and 2018 so that all trends could be analyzed from one dataset. A brief description of the dataset can be seen below.

#### Data Dictionary
|Feature|Type|Affiliated Test|Description|
|---|---|---|---|
|**state**|*string*|both|The state for which test scores and statistics were recorded| 
|**act_2017_pct_participation**|*float*|ACT|Percentage of total students who took the ACT in 2017|
|**act_2017_english**|*float*|ACT|Mean score for the English section of the 2017 ACT|
|**act_2017_math**|*float*|ACT|Mean score for the Math section of the 2017 ACT|
|**act_2017_reading**|*float*|ACT|Mean score for the reading section of the 2017 ACT|
|**act_2017_science**|*float*|ACT|Mean score for the science section of the 2017 ACT|
|**act_2017_composite**|*float*|ACT|Mean composite score for the 2017 ACT|
|**sat_2017_pct_participation**|*float*|SAT|Percentage of total students who took the SAT in 2017|
|**sat_2017_reading_writing**|*int*|SAT|Mean score for Evidence-based reading and writing section of the 2017 SAT|
|**sat_2017_math**|*int*|SAT|Mean score for the math section of the 2017 SAT|
|**sat_2017_total**|*int*|SAT|Mean total score for the 2017 SAT|
|**act_2018_pct_participation**|*float*|ACT|Percentage of total students who took the SAT in 2018|
|**act_2018_composite**|*float*|ACT|Mean composite score for the 2018 ACT|
|**sat_2018_pct_participation**|*float*|SAT|Percentage of total students who took the SAT in 2018|
|**sat_2018_reading_writing**|*int*|SAT|Mean score for Evidence-based reading and writing section of the 2018 SAT|
|**sat_2018_math**|*int*|SAT|Mean score for the math section of the 2018 SAT|
|**sat_2018_total**|*int*|SAT|Mean total score for the 2018 SAT|

Once it was evident which states were succeeding for their respective tests per state, I noticed that certain states had a 100% participation rate for either the SAT or the ACT but not both. This was intriguing as it seemed very implausible that a whole population of a state would coincidentally take a single type of test over the other. With some research I found that the states that yielded a 100% participation rate for either the SAT or the ACT had either federal or state government contracts in place which made a single test mandatory in exchange for registration fees being waived for the students taking the test. The loss of the fees would be compensated by the state governments paying the CollegeBoard in the contracts instead. The data clearly showed that states with some sort of government contract showed 100% participation rates for the SAT even in states which had previously had state contracts with the ACT due to various merits of the SAT such as its critical thinking testing method over the ACT's fact memorization testing method.

### Conclusion and Recommendation
After seeing the clear positive effects of a state contract on SAT participation rates in a state, it is clear that pursuing further state contracts with other states is the most effective strategy to drastically improve SAT participation nationwide. While there have been instances of turnover from ACT contracts to Collegeboard contracts in states such as Colorado due to the redesign of the SAT, the most efficient use of effort would be to target states that have not had any federal or state contracts such as Iowa first.

#### All Sources Used: 
- [What is The Collegeboard](https://www.studentdebtrelief.us/college-tips/collegeboard-org/)
- [Colorado's change from ACT to the SAT](https://www.chalkbeat.org/posts/co/2015/12/23/goodbye-act-hello-sat-a-significant-change-for-colorado-high-schoolers/)
- [States that required SAT in 2018 with Federal Accountability](https://www.testive.com/state-sat-act/)
- [States that required SAT in 2017 with Federal Accountability](https://www.edweek.org/ew/section/multimedia/what-tests-did-each-state-require-2016-17.html) 

