# Optimizing Realty Feature Selection for Highest Sales Price  


### Problem Statement
We are a home renovation company looking to pitch our garage, kitchen, basement and bathroom renovation services to a group of homeowners who are looking to increase the value of their properties in order to potentially sell their homes in the near future. Using historical assessment parameters collected by the Ames Housing Authority, we created a model that will recommend which features of a house would best increase the sales price of a house if renovated or built. However, this model was rather rudimentary and we would like to instead apply it to larger projects such as housing construction where we would like to earn a contract to constructing houses of a standardized style in a neighborhood. We are conducting this project in order to figure out what features of a house would yield the highest value for implementation in this future neighborhood project.


### Executive Summary
Outliers were initially removed upon recommendation by the [Ames Housing data dictionary](http://jse.amstat.org/v19n3/decock/DataDocumentation.txt). EDA was conducted using incremental numerical ranking to replace the string ranks in ordinal variable columns. Then nominal data was dummied into variable columns and finally numerical values were filtered for false null values using inferences from the data dictionary and checking for ordinal nulls in other associated columns. Additionally, numerical outliers like years that are not within the realm of possibility were also corrected. 

All columns were used in an attempt to keep the model as robust as possible. Initial attempts for filtering the features for Garage specific columns were later deleted for not providing any real insight. Using all the features yielded higher scores and also greater insight into the key features for maximizing the sales price of a house especially when moving on from simple linear regressions to the lasso regression.

### Conclusions 
The lasso regression was the most efficient model at providing positive relationships due to the nature of the alpha penalty making use of the negative relationships of coefficients as well. With this model, we were able to understand that the best neighborhood for a new housing complex would be Northridge Heights and houses constructed here should have attached garages, larger basements, and other features as is evident by the positive correlation they share with sales price.   
